notes.md, before:

# operators

evaluates conditions in sql queries.

## comparison

=
<
>
<=
>=

## logical

almost exclusively used in the WHERE clause of queries.

## LIKE

# functions

## string
TRIM, LTRIM, RTRIM

## aggregate

SUM() returns the sum of all values in a column

## date/time

## mathematical

# data analysis with GROUP BY

# Normal form

PROS:

Allows more complex realtionships (many to many)

CONS:

Can take multiple joins to retrieve, which makes it inefficient

May be designed expecting a pattern but that pattern only has a few occurencies (may be denormalized)

# Data formats

INTERVAL

# Indexes

Best used in tables where reads are more common

# pg_dump and pg_restore

# WHAT KIND OF PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE IS SQL?

a special purpose language since it's basically only used to interact with relational databases.

# DDL, DML, DCL

# Keys

Natural keys (name, phone number, ssn) vs Surrogate key (id)

PRIMARY KEYS vs NOT NULL UNIQUE

# ORDER BY

ASC ascending vs DESC descending order

# How PostgreSQL executes queries

query and database optimization

SELECT queries can be very complex

#DML
Manipulation: CREATE, READ, UPDATE, DELETE THE ACTUAL DATA.

SELECT
INSERT
UPDATE
DELETE

#DDL
Definition: Create, modify and delete databases and tables. Describing how data is structured.

CREATE TABLE
ALTER
DROP

---
SELECT column_name FROM my_table;

The above is a DML statement, since it manipulates the data and not the structure of the table/database.

---
CREATE TABLE things (
  id serial PRIMARY KEY,
  item text NOT NULL UNIQUE,
  material text NOT NULL
);

On the other hand, the above statement is a DDL component, because it defines the type of information stored in a db table.

---
ALTER TABLE things
DROP CONSTRAINT thing_item_key;

This is a DDL statement.

---
INSERT INTO things VALUES (3, 'Scissors', 'Metal');

This is a DML component since it adds more data to the table.

---
UPDATE things
SET material = 'plastic'
WHERE item = 'Cup';

UPDATE is DML since it changes the data;

---
\d

\d is a psql console (meta) command, but it does act like a DDL statement since it displays the schema of the db/table;

---
DELETE FROM things WHERE item = 'Cup';

DML

---
DROP DATABASE xyzzy;

DDL and DML because it deletes the whole structure, including all the data.

---
CREATE SEQUENCE part_number_sequence;

DDL. It adds a sequence object to the db structure. It manipulates the data definitions, creating a new sequence number generator which will dictate how the data (next value) will be generated.. All CREATE statements are thought of as DDL.

# Relational databases

Relational db persist data in a set of relations. A relation is pretty much another way of saying "table". Sequences and views can also be relations. Anything you can use in a FROM clause, basically.

A relaionship is a connection between rows of data in different tables (relations).

Commit message:

notes about db diagrams and foreign keys

notes.md, after:

# operators

evaluates conditions in sql queries.

## comparison

=
<
>
<=
>=

## logical

almost exclusively used in the WHERE clause of queries.

## LIKE

# functions

## string
TRIM, LTRIM, RTRIM

## aggregate

SUM() returns the sum of all values in a column

## date/time

## mathematical

# data analysis with GROUP BY

# Normal form

PROS:

Allows more complex realtionships (many to many)

CONS:

Can take multiple joins to retrieve, which makes it inefficient

May be designed expecting a pattern but that pattern only has a few occurencies (may be denormalized)

# Data formats

INTERVAL

# Indexes

Best used in tables where reads are more common

# pg_dump and pg_restore

# WHAT KIND OF PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE IS SQL?

a special purpose language since it's basically only used to interact with relational databases.

# DDL, DML, DCL

# Keys

Natural keys (name, phone number, ssn) vs Surrogate key (id)

PRIMARY KEYS vs NOT NULL UNIQUE

# ORDER BY

ASC ascending vs DESC descending order

# How PostgreSQL executes queries

query and database optimization

SELECT queries can be very complex

#DML
Manipulation: CREATE, READ, UPDATE, DELETE THE ACTUAL DATA.

SELECT
INSERT
UPDATE
DELETE

#DDL
Definition: Create, modify and delete databases and tables. Describing how data is structured.

CREATE TABLE
ALTER
DROP

---
SELECT column_name FROM my_table;

The above is a DML statement, since it manipulates the data and not the structure of the table/database.

---
CREATE TABLE things (
  id serial PRIMARY KEY,
  item text NOT NULL UNIQUE,
  material text NOT NULL
);

On the other hand, the above statement is a DDL component, because it defines the type of information stored in a db table.

---
ALTER TABLE things
DROP CONSTRAINT thing_item_key;

This is a DDL statement.

---
INSERT INTO things VALUES (3, 'Scissors', 'Metal');

This is a DML component since it adds more data to the table.

---
UPDATE things
SET material = 'plastic'
WHERE item = 'Cup';

UPDATE is DML since it changes the data;

---
\d

\d is a psql console (meta) command, but it does act like a DDL statement since it displays the schema of the db/table;

---
DELETE FROM things WHERE item = 'Cup';

DML

---
DROP DATABASE xyzzy;

DDL and DML because it deletes the whole structure, including all the data.

---
CREATE SEQUENCE part_number_sequence;

DDL. It adds a sequence object to the db structure. It manipulates the data definitions, creating a new sequence number generator which will dictate how the data (next value) will be generated.. All CREATE statements are thought of as DDL.

# Relational databases

Relational db persist data in a set of relations. A relation is pretty much another way of saying "table". Sequences and views can also be relations. Anything you can use in a FROM clause, basically.

A relationship is a connection between rows of data in different tables (relations).

# database diagrams

conceptual schema: focus on identifying entities and their relationships.

physical schema: focus on implementation, database specific

# foreign key

referential integrity: the db ensures that every value on a foreign key column exists in the primary key column of the referenced table.

It doesn't prevent null values to be stored in the foreign key column. in order to do that we also need to add the not null constraint to the column.
